Emmett Miller grew up as an outsider
in the harsh environment of New York.
He was black, a Shakespeare fan,
mathematics geek, and visionary.
He didn't fit with the world of the black nor the whites.
He witnessed firsthand how separatism
was the prevailing political paradigm.
Later in life as a medical student,
he noticed that this same paradigm of separatism
was being taught in relationship to patient care.
This sent him on a lifelong quest
to heal both patients and the planet.
Emmett brings a loving heart and brilliant mind
to the table of the paradigm shift,
which he says cannot occur without deep self-examination.
I love what you've done here,
but it's going to be quite a task
for us to get through this in 45 minutes,
because you want to heal the world.
That's valiant and we need to heal the world,
and we need people like you to do this, to guide us,
but we're going to jump into --
I want to get just a teeny bit of background
on your motivation from medical school days,
and seeing the huge disconnect in the way
the system taught you to, quote, "heal people,"
and society at large, and the globe.
What was your initial experience
that sent you down this road?
Well, I think that soon after I arrived
in medical school and started working with patients,
my clinical years, I was astounded to see
what, basically, was a very abusive pattern
between the medical system and the patient.
Many physicians who were very fine men
and who I continued to look up to and emulate,
even to this day, who loved their patients,
who felt for their patients, and who gave their patients
more than just some drugs and surgery,
but the system as a whole tended to select human beings
to come into it that would participate in providing
a decidedly un --
an entirely inappropriate form of medicine,
a real sub-standard form of medicine.
Well, and they teach this in school even.
I was reading part of this culture on a couch concept here,
and you were talking about, even in the system,
when they teach you as an intern
to not become emotionally involved with your patient.
You can understand that in the extreme,
but doesn't that toss out empathy?
Doesn't it toss out a certain amount of compassion?
What happens when the system is actually
structured such a way?
Well, what happens is we have a system which
is not aimed toward creating health, and wholeness,
and healing, but is aimed at creating more business
for the system.
To not really provide people with what they need,
and I'm not blaming any person.
I'm simply talking about the system.
We're all caught in a very dysfunctional system
which is destroying us, and that became clear to me
when I was in medical school.
As you were looking at these people
with varying degrees of illness, you were also seeing
the system that they had just
plugged into to heal them as ill,
and the system that's running that as ill.
As you extrapolated out, you have a planet
that is diseased, that is becoming very crippled.
Yes, well growing up as a black man
in the '40s and the '50s, I experienced this
incredible inequity of the system.
At home, I lived in a neighborhood that was 98% black.
When I was in school, because I was intelligent,
I was surrounded by basically 100% white
and Jewish people in New York City.
Wonderful people, people had no sense, however,
of what was being done to those of another color
three blocks away from the school.
There was such prejudice at that time.
I had an opportunity to feel that prejudice.
I had the opportunity to feel it at home, too, because
because I was intelligent, because I read Shakespeare,
because I was interested in math and physics,
I was considered to be weird.
At home, the black people considered me far too white
to be fully included.
White people considered me too black to be included,
so I was never invited to any social functions
or parties, all the usual things that happen
in a racist society.
I knew that this was part of the political system.
Suddenly I found out that people were
operating under the same principles
in the medical system itself.
People were not being attended to.
They were being harmed.
It became clear to me soon into my medical career
that I could do more by touching a person,
by touching them physically.
Indeed, how I performed the physical examination.
As I touched their body, I treated their body
as though it was something precious,
as though it was something beautiful.
My goal was to discover, how could I lead
this person to begin to make changes in their lives
that would bring out the dormant beauty
within that body that was called sick?
Instead of doing what American medicine did,
allopathic medicine, which was to try to fight the sickness,
I recognized that 90% of the illnesses that people had,
the physical illnesses that brought them to me
as a physician, had their root,
not in some external cause, but in an internal cause.
It was the result of how they were dealing
with stress in their lives.
It had to do with the images that they
were holding in their mind.
Had to do with their self-image,
how they saw themselves, how much value
they placed in themselves, the amount of contact
they had with a spiritual life, those things.
The amount of contact they had with spiritual life,
those are the things that ultimately would come out
as physical symptomatology.
I began to set my direction toward two things.
First, deriving a system by which we could
work with people, that would enable them
to use their minds to awaken the intrinsic
healing power that was obviously within people.
I was able to demonstrate that over, and over,
and over again in my clinical practice to my satisfaction.
But, the question is, what can we do
to maximize a person's ability to use the mind
to awaken that healing power within,
and allow it to flow into those organs,
and organ systems, and behaviors,
and beliefs, and emotions where healing is needed.
When that takes place, then the physical symptom
resolves on its own.
Not everything resolves.
There are certain things that can't,
but like 90% of what it is that bothers us
can be resolved in that way.
That became my work.
That was number one.
Number two was to change the medical system altogether.
My belief is that in the changing how we look at healing,
we change how we look at humanity,
how we look at human beings.
This would be a high leverage point
for changing the paradigm with which
the world looked at itself,
with how people look at their relationships,
their family, their community,
people of other nations, or of other beliefs,
or of other races.
Absolutely.
I mean, healing extends out to all of those.
Yes, yes.
The basic -- (sighs)
One of the things I was looking for is,
what is the most fundamental formulation of that,
the formula for healing, as it were, the correction program.
As a mathematician, because I was a mathematician
before I went into medicine,
and my specialty was point set topology,
how you transform one space into another space.
I simply used the principles of mathematics
to look at illness as being a state.
How can that state be transformed into another state
that we can call health, or wellness --
Or wholeness.
Or wholeness, or peak performance,
or joy, or love, or ecstasy.
What would that be?
That's what I worked on, is finding what is that,
what is that fundamental healing formula?
Realizing that when you find a fundamental formula
within a system like that,
it works at all levels of systems.
Precisely the same formula will work
for the individual healing within themselves,
bringing mind, body, emotions, spirit,
and behavior into balance.
It works in a family or a community.
It works at that level, or it can work
at the level of a nation, or at the level of a planet.
Precisely the same process.
By refining that in the privacy and the intimacy
of the one-to-one contact with thousands upon thousands
of human beings, I was able to refine this
to a certain degree.
The world at large,
the world of medicine at large took
a very different path than your path.
Mm-hmm (affirmative).
All you have to do is
go into an HMO and this reason,
say a Kaiser facility, and see the massive structures
that are going up, the hallways crowded
with people who are sick.
It's amazing how ill we've become as a species, really.
Yes, on one hand, you're looking at the quantum effect
of healing the self, and you heal a portion or the whole.
But let's take it to a non-quantum third dimensional view.
How do we begin implementing this in the face of a system
that has gone about its very narrow path
that's every bit as deficient as it was
when you were in medical school, if not worse now?
Just as a human being brings healing to their lives,
whether it's physical, mental, emotional, relational,
whatever it might be, behavioral,
one brings healing into one's life by examining one's self,
by being willing to step back,
to step back from the usual decisions,
to stop playing the game, "I'm right, and I know everything,
"and that person's wrong, and that person's wrong."
This defensive stance, what we call on the individual basis,
the ego defenses.
Because a person has been injured in their lives,
in order to protect something very, very sensitive within,
they construct a set of beliefs about the world,
a set of ways of interpreting the world.
"You're Christian, so you must be evil."
Ways of interpreting the world
and ways of behaving in the world.
In order to resolve some of the inner conflicts
with an individual, the inner conflicts
that are making them ill, it becomes necessary
to look at one's self and to look at this persona,
to look at this ego that we've constructed,
this PR agency that we've constructed
to convince the rest of the world that we are
whatever we're trying to convince them that we are,
and to keep us convinced that we're okay.
Right, that's the big one,
that self protection.
This really requires an extreme amount
of openness, vulnerability, and re-education.
Yes.
I'm just going to pull one little fact
from your manuscript that I've read,
just because it kind of hits it square on, which is
our way of dealing with things.
"In California, between the years of 1980 and 1998,"
you say, "California built 21 prisons and one college
"in the same time period."
What does that say about the way
we're going about healing this thing?
Education certainly is not the priority here, is it?
No.
Well, we're not aiming to heal it.
That's not what our behavior is.
Maybe it's what we really want.
I believe it's what we really want,
but in order to know that, we as a community
of human beings as a collective,
need to do that same process as the individual does
to step back and take a look at ourselves,
to step out of the ego constraints to look at
the defenses that we've set up,
and say, "What's really true here?"
Now, the system that we are under,
the system that builds far more prisons
than hospitals, far more prisons than schools,
this is a system that sees the world as
a collection of opposing items.
There's me and you.
There's good and bad.
There's black and white.
There's American and there's illegal alien.
There's Christian and there's Muslim,
and then there's infidel,
and then there's the rich and the poor,
and on, and on, and on, and on.
We see the world as being, essentially,
consisting of different entities that are
at war with each other, different products.
Yahoo versus Google, I mean, aren't we
in the same business?
No, but we see it as a --
What if they got together?
What if they blended, what would happen?
ABC, CBS, NBC all struggling, fighting.
What if people got together, and instead of
looking at differences, what if we looked at
what is it that we have in common?
Not to the exclusion of looking at differences,
differences are important.
It's important for me to know that
I'm a male and not a female, otherwise I'll get in trouble
in a public bathroom.
Right. (laughs)
Yes, this is down the essence and very true.
But our world looks far more at differences
than it does at similarities.
We don't look at the union.
We look at, what are the things
that are creating violence?
What are the things that are creating conflict?
We look at contrasts, and then we take sides.
Then we become Republican, or we become Democrat,
or we become whatever it might be.
We take sides, and then we envision ourselves
as in this battle.
Here are these young men and women
who've had absolutely terrible childhoods.
They've lived in poverty.
They've been abused by parents that the system
takes no time to train how to be parents.
You need a license to drive a car.
You don't even need a license to be a parent,
and many of them are suffering from inborn problems.
Probably 30% to 40% of the people in prisons
have clinical attention deficit disorder.
These are patients,
but no, we see them as the bad guys,
because one of the fastest growing industries
in the country is the security industry,
the building of prisons where we can warehouse
all of our mistakes.
Remember the old days when things went bad in England?
When people were criminals, they would ship them
off to Australia or some other outback place?
That's it, just exile them.
Now we stick them in big brick and steel buildings
because we see them as enemies.
We don't see ourselves as having any responsibility
to rehabilitate them, nor do we see
any responsibility in terms of our training children
in such a way that they won't end up in that situation.
But it makes a lot of money.
When you see an imbalance out there,
and you wonder, how can normally
sensitive human beings, all of us are caring,
all of us are loving.
We love our families.
Nobody means ill to anyone else,
but the system forces us into conflict with each other,
the same way as, well, you take Iraq.
Iraq, what's Iraq?
The western countries came in and drew a bunch of lines,
and says, "Okay, we're going to call this Iraq."
Those people had nothing in common.
They're three totally different groups,
tribes that had lived for untold centuries.
They had their own balance.
We put a line about them and they're put together.
They can't continue their normal separations,
because Saddam Hussein and company wouldn't let them.
Saddam Hussein is gone and so they're now
in a huge war with each other, murdering each other.
What happens is --
Or the same thing with the poor whites,
and the blacks, and the immigrants
in the southern part of the country.
They're hating each other. Why?
Because the system has placed them against each other.
If they really knew each other as individuals,
they would love each other.
Our system doesn't look at that,
because the system runs on money.
It really needs to have this polarization
in order to keep people in enough desire slash fear --
Yes.
...to keep the system financed.
Yes, if I can make you afraid,
I can get you to buy an alarm system for your house
or a Smith and Wesson gun, or I can get you
to vote for me because I'm going to build a bigger wall.
Or I'm going to sell you this shampoo
that's going to make sure you don't have dandruff anymore,
because you're an inadequate person if you have dandruff,
and on, and on, and on.
We teach people, "You can't look like this.
"You have to look like this model over here."
You know, 30% of the women in colleges
have clinical eating disorders
that's being created by our media,
which is being fueled by people who are doing it for money.
The war is being run by people who are doing it for money.
Absolutely, pure profit.
Nobody wants to be in this war,
but there's a lot of money being made.
Right, by a few.
Any time there's a lot of money being made by a few,
then that's going to swing the direction
of the whole system.
Suppose it was that way in your family.
If you had a cousin who got very, very rich,
and then decided, didn't like you
and so paid everybody else not to come
to your birthday party.
That would be ludicrous, but that's what happens
in the system that we're in right now.
The medical world was just one aspect
of how the entire system is off.
This requires deep self-evaluation,
and it requires a lot of courage, because you're talking
about a person, first, as you say, look to yourself
and examine what is in conflict internally,
and what is not working for you.
Then, of course, you would have to extend that out
to your immediate relationships,
what's working, what's not working within this?
Then you have to extend it out to,
not just your family, but, say, your workplace
or your community.
You have to engage others in this same dialogue.
If you can't have, I mean --
The idea, I assume, is to get everybody
into this place of reflection so that we can
structure something more in integrity, more whole,
and that means unplugging from almost every
system that's been set up for us.
That's true.
Everything.
You're talking about the zealotry of a lot of religions,
and certainly political governments, and politics.
The same thing even in this radical consumerism we have,
running away with us, teaching women they should be
98 pounds and 5'9".
Yes.
How do we begin to unravel this?
I would like to get to the World Cafe as well,
within all of this.
All of these things, as many as they are,
they're all based upon a very single, simple choice.
It's the choice of the paradigm with which you choose
to look at the very next experience
in your life right now.
What I'm saying is this, there's two separate paradigms.
This one that's built upon opposites, polarity,
the principle of dispersion, or as I call it, violence.
The other system, which is the unitary way of thinking,
it's about love.
It's about the pulling together.
It's about wholeness and whatever that means.
It seems like black and white,
two very different ways of looking at the world.
We need to learn how to look at the world
in this way over here.
What we need to realize is, because of the amount
of violence that's been programmed into us,
our bodies, and emotional systems, and minds
are running at a very high level of anxiety and tension.
That anxiety and tension, through the hippocampus
and a number of other structures in the brain,
inhibit the prefrontal cortex from being able
to focus upon what it really needs to focus on.
We have a kind of cultural attention deficit disorder.
Very true.
What's important then, is to quiet that anxiety.
That anxiety can be quieted by choosing
the next thought that you have to be a deeply relaxing one,
to become aware that at this moment in time,
there's no other place that you need to go,
there's nothing else that you need to do,
there's no problem that you have to solve.
You can be here.
Get off your own back, basically.
Yeah.
You can be here and now.
That this moment is the only moment that exists.
You can take a deep breath in, (breathes deeply)
and as you let it out, let go of concern
with everything else in the world except this right here.
(takes a deep breath)
To let go of concern with the past, or the future,
and come into this moment.
We have lots of tools for doing that,
meditation, deep relaxation, self hypnosis, yoga.
Coming into that moment, and then, in that moment,
accessing the fundamental wisdom
that's at the core of our being.
What wisdom means, means making a wise choice.
To make a wise choice now is to choose
to do something I will look back upon
in a month or a year and say, "Good.
"That was a wise choice."
Let's say you decide you want to
do a pre-emptive strike into some country.
This is just a hypothetical example.
You might want to ask yourself,
"How am I going to feel about this in a year?
"How am I going to feel about this in three to five years?"
Then honestly evaluate the information that's there,
and say, "What is the wise choice?"
Just as we need to do that as nations and as a planet,
we can do that as human beings starting right now,
to access that place of wisdom within and be at peace,
that place that knows that sometimes
you need to accept with serenity,
and sometimes you have to act with courage.
That place that can allow you to make that choice
in such a way that next week, you will be stronger.
Next week, you will be more whole.
Instead, we tend to just react.
We react because the reaction
creates a great deal of stress,
and the system makes a great deal of money from that stress.
Stress, people gain power from
there being stress in a system.
"I'll lead you."
Anything you can imagine, there's somebody out there
claiming it and wanting to guide this group of people.
"You all follow me, the world's coming to an end."
Or, "These people are going to take away our jobs,"
or whatever it might be.
Not to help the people.
Again, it's not aimed toward finding our wholeness,
but in the case of the power-mongers,
it has to do with how do I get more power
into smaller and smaller places,
because there's a lot of money available
to somebody who knows the technology
of condensing power into the hands
of a small number of people.
The PR agencies, lobbyists, and so forth.
That's what the system's doing out there,
creating, not wholeness, but more separation,
more dispersion, and more violence.
Okay, so we come within to ourselves,
reach that place of wisdom, look honestly at the world
to see it as it truly is, so look honestly at myself,
to realize the power that I have.
As an American, to realize that I'm using
three to four times more of the earth's bounty
than people in poor countries.
Is that okay?
Is it okay?
Where do I find that arrogance within me
that allows me to go out and by a Porsche,
while a baby starves to death every three minutes,
or every three seconds?
It's unbelievable.
It seems that to sustain that kind of system,
you really do have to be more or less
in isolation from each other too.
What would happen if people started talking,
and holding hands, and realizing,
we're more alike than we are dissimilar.
To keep people apart, as you say,
the separatism is really critical to the system.
You have been trying to work for a very long time
at bringing people together, at getting dialogue
across all boundaries going.
Is this really a key element?
Yes, it's a crucial element.
We've become accustomed to having someone else
tell us what to do, to see our leadership
as coming from outside.
However we define it, as our father,
or our scout leader, our teacher,
or a super model, or our president,
or our priest, or whoever it might be.
We're accustomed to being led from outside.
You mean the great unifier?
Yes. (laughing)
I love that one, our president.
Right.
Declaring he is the great unifier
at a time there's never been more division and strife.
Quite interesting.
I'm sorry, go ahead.
Just had to put that one in there.
Right.
He turned out to be the great decider instead,
which he definitely was.
Oh yeah, the great decider, the great divider.
Even if we look at the highest echelons of government,
we see that people are being led, not from their hearts,
not from their wisdom, but from some catechism,
some set of rules, some set of principles
that they're following, or that their cabinet
is telling them.
Like an invisible hand.
It is an invisible hand, and it's maintained
by this denial, by our inability to really see who we are,
and to really see who others are.
Connecting with others is crucial.
That's why we work with the World Cafe.
Let's get into that.
Yes, please, tell us about the World Cafe.
After I had defined for myself the principles
of mind-body medicine for use with individuals,
I studied with a wonderful woman, Virginia Satir,
and learned about how to apply
those principles in families.
Then, in the 1980s, I worked with Juanita Brown,
and we looked at how to use these principles
into organizations, how a company could be driven
by their shared spirit, how there could be
a collective sense of wholeness, of consciousness.
How we could be deeply committed
to the same thing and support ourselves,
and create high-performance organizations.
Dr. Brown continued in the 1990s to develop,
using these same principles, the World Cafe.
The World Cafe is sort of her recognition
that some of the best and most important thinking
goes on over a cup of tea or a cup of coffee.
In the old style, for instance, in the European,
it's at a cafe.
In drawing a group of people together
to think about something, whether it was a company,
or an organization, or it might be two or three
elements of a community that were having
a disagreement about something.
She would have them meet all around little tables
of four to six people per table
in a cafe kind of atmosphere.
Nice music playing in the background, flowers on the table,
paper tablecloth with colored pens at the table
so that people could sketch and draw as they talk.
You would have three people from, let's say,
three people from one point of view
meeting with three people from the other point of view
around many, many different little tables.
She would have them, initially, discuss something like,
"What is it that has drawn you into
"being interested in this topic that brings us together?"
People would entertain that question together
for maybe 15 minutes.
Everybody would share their personal perspective.
Then there would be a break, and all except one
of the people would get up from that table
and find a new table, and re-sort themselves.
The person who remained was the host.
As each new person came, introduced themselves,
they'd sit down, and he would share or she would share
what happened in their group.
Each of the people arriving, "Well, that's interesting,
"because we found in our group so-and-so."
Then after a minute or two, she would say,
"Okay, we're going to go to another question."
She would ask, perhaps the same question,
or maybe another question, such as,
"If we were able to create peace and wholeness
"in this community, what's your best dream
"for how the outcome could look if we were successful?
"Don't ask how, but suppose it all worked out."
People would again share, but the idea in sharing
is not to make other people listen to your point of view,
but listen to the concept that's arising
in the middle of the table,
the magic in the middle, the unity.
Where do we all connect?
Don't worry about how we differ,
focus on how we connect.
After 15 minutes, they may break and go to another table,
maybe answer another question.
Well, the energy in the room starts going higher and higher
as people start making personal contact,
respecting other people's values,
respecting the principles that they live by,
respecting the vision and intelligence they have.
All of the sudden, says, "Oh my gosh, you know,
"he's an immigrant but he's intelligent,
"and he loves his family just as I do."
He wants the same things
for his family, and his community, and his world.
Yeah, exactly.
"Well, gee, if it's possible for us to solve this
"in a way that satisfies everybody's needs,
"boy, I really want to do that."
Then we'd stop the cafe for a moment
and people would share out,
"What do you hear emerging from the conversations
"that you've been in?"
People stand up, and these wonderfully
creative ideas come about.
Meanwhile, we have a graphic recorder
who's recording all these things that are being spoken
by drawing beautiful pictures, visual graphics,
as well as a few words, so at the end of the day,
and there are a few other things that we do,
but you get the idea.
It's how you develop that wholeness,
represented graphically in such a way
that people can, later in the day,
simply look through the images there
and remember the whole path of the conversation
of this group of people.
That may be 12 people, or it could be 1200,
or I think it's been up to 6 or 7,000 people
have been worked with in this way.
This is a global affair.
That's right.
We've made a couple of videos of it
that are available right now at places like,
on TheWorldCafe.com.
You can see videos of just how it works
and what people's experience of it is.
It doesn't belong to anybody.
This isn't a company.
Juanita and her partner did a wonderful thing
after building this for years, just last year,
they gave it to the World Cafe community.
It's about 5 or 10,000 people who are practicing it.
It brings community and harmony to groups of people,
and most important, teaches them the value,
and the importance, and the technology
of how to have good conversations with another person,
how to have a conversation with a person
where you respect the other person,
where you honestly appreciate that person,
where you honor and appreciate that person's beliefs
and their standards, where you trust
that there's another loving human being inside the other,
even if it's an adversary.
To use Gandhi's admonition, which is,
"The ally you must always seek
"is the part of your adversary that knows what is right."
That's what's going to save the world,
because you know what we need,
and I know what we need.
Mr. Bush knows what we need.
Osama Bin Laden knows what we need.
The man next door knows what we need.
The people down where you work know what we need.
All we need to do is to learn how to be quiet for a while,
to look within, and to realize that we need to
awaken the leader that's inside,
that we need to lead our own lives.
I talked before about this pyramidal structure
that most of the organizations,
and gatherings, and communities in our culture have,
in which there's the top guy, who's really powerful,
and a few people that will take a bullet for the top guy,
and so forth down like that.
Instead of looking for that leadership
just coming from the outside, because we've been misled,
enormously, enormously misled.
When you talk about conflict, when you talk about
the division between people, when you talk about
what I saw in medicine or what you see in the building
of jails instead of hospitals, think about people
being murdered in wars, and being sent home
without arms and legs.
We just look at, "Oh, it's only 4 or 5,000
"that have been killed in the war."
Five times that many have physical illnesses
that are going to plague them for the rest of their lives --
That doesn't even count the Iraqis,
quote, "the enemy."
Right, thank you.
Goodness, children and women.
Absolutely.
The estimate is 80 to a million have been killed,
and how many have been wounded?
Let's not even talk about the psychological damage
that's been done.
That's not talk about the enemies that we're all making.
Insane, and war after war.
We start the Spanish American War, and blame it on Spain
because we want Cuba, and we die for that.
The Gulf of Tonkin event, purely fictitious.
There was no shooting.
I know a man who was on the boat.
Everyone who died in Vietnam, all of that
agony that went on in our culture,
parents disowning their children
for burning their draft cards,
the shootings at Kent State.
60,000 died in the war, more than twice that many
have committed suicide since they've come home
because of a lie.
Now we have yellowcake uranium.
It goes on and on.
Why?
Not because anybody wants anyone to die.
Not because anybody wants to be cruel
or to take someone else's right to life away,
but the system is forcing us into it.
What we need to do is to discover
a new form of leadership, a distributed leadership,
like a healthy family where people see each other
as equals, and honor each other,
see the good in each other, and say,
"What is it that we can do with each other?"
How to make stone soup, and those are the principles
that the World Cafe teaches.
How to treat another person in such a way
as to create a unit, a cell, if you will,
of distributed leadership.
But you can't contribute to that very well
until you understand how to lead yourself,
and that's the awakening the leader within.
That's the first step, get quiet.
Second step, go to that leader within.
The third step is examining the world
to see the truth of what's going on,
and to be willing to question, be willing to question.
If you're Republican, be willing to question deeply.
If you're a Democrat, be willing to question deeply.
To question deeply what's going on,
to be willing to see whatever's there,
to be willing to come out of denial,
to be free of the automatic defensive response,
to learn how to do that.
It's not really difficult.
It doesn't require anyone else.
You can do it within yourself.
Then looking at the world to see the truth of what is.
If you then look within yourself,
you'll discover that you have something that you can provide
to make that world different.
This is true, and I think, to a large extent,
this is also worth having that dialogue,
and knowing your neighbor,
and everyone is your neighbor,
comes in because there ultimately has to be
a different type of decision that you make.
There can't be runaway consumption
in the industrialized world, and abject poverty,
and the quote, "undeveloped world,"
It's like, who unplugs first?
It's like, who lays down their arms first?
By knowing each other and seeing each other's eyeballs,
it seems to me, that's a critical piece
of saying, "Let's do it together, even if it's just two."
Yes, yes.
Even if it's just two.
To be able to see the other person,
to be able to discover what it means to say
that there's a oneness that we're both part of.
If people who are religious, usually,
some part of their religion says that we're all one.
The Christian religion says we're all one
in the Body of Christ.
That's what the Body of Christ is,
the wholeness of who we are, every culture says that.
The Muslims say that too.
There's only one, except that in addition, they say,
"We're all one, we Christians, but..."
You know?
Yeah, we Christians are all one.
Yeah, we Christians are all one, but those,
they could be one if they realize the error of their ways.
And convert.
Which was the same thing Osama Bin Laden said
in one of his recent tapes.
I'll go easy on you if you'll convert.
Right.
This insanity isn't working.
This separatism isn't working.
(laughing)
It's not working, and what most people don't realize,
and we project it out there and say,
"Bush is crazy, and Bin Laden's crazy.
"They're blind," or, "Democrats are blind," or whatever,
to realize that each of us is doing it in our own lives.
Each of us is being blind in our own lives.
We allow ourselves to be racist, to be classist.
We allow ourselves to be abusive of other people
in our attitudes.
One example that occurred to me is a story I heard.
It took place, I think, in the '30s or '40s.
Jascha Heifetz, the wonderful violinist,
had a concert at Carnegie Hall.
He arrived an hour ahead of time,
wearing old raggedy clothes, opened his violin case,
and threw a couple of dollar bills in it,
and stood out in front of the box office,
and played his entire performance for the night.
People walked by him, rushing to get to the ticket office.
Isn't that amazing?
Then, when he walked out on stage,
the audience was...
Isn't that amazing?
They were there to wear their mink coats,
and to come to see the great Jascha Heifetz,
and nobody stopped and said, "My gosh,
"what beautiful music that tramp is playing."
This is how we are.
We hide behind labels.
We don't see the truth.
We don't see what we're doing to others.
We punish others, and we're cruel to others,
and we feel justified because they deserved it.
This is their deserved punishment,
so I'm not going to talk to you,
or I'm going to attack you, or I'm going to
assassinate your character, or I'm going to cheat you,
I'm going to trick you, I'm going to cheat on you.
We feel justified in doing it because, well,
after all, your family did this to my family,
or, you're a rich person so you won't mind
if I steal this from you.
Or, you're a bad guy, so it's okay if I shoot you.
Or, you're a Muslim, or from the United States,
therefore I can shoot you, or whatever it may be,
it's all the same, but we need to be able to see it
in our own individual lives.
Republicans don't think they have a blind spot,
and the Democrats, I'm talking about the vocal ones
who are the red state, blue state, you know?
"Oh, you're a Democrat?
"Sorry, we can't date anymore."
It's like, "They're all crazy.
"They're all misled.
"They don't see."
Meanwhile, they're saying, "They don't see."
Maybe none of us are seeing.
The only way to find out is to go to that place within
and be willing to take that honest look at yourself.
If you're not in denial, you'll go, "Oh, incredible,
"I'm just as enlightened as I thought I was all along."
If you discover you are in denial, then you ask yourself,
"Is there something in me that wants integrity?
"Is there something in me that wants what I feel,
"and what I say, what I do, and what I believe
"to all be the same, to be congruent with each other?"
If so, maybe I want to come out of that denial
and begin to change the way I interact with the world,
with the way I treat people around me,
with the way I treat my planet,
how I look at health, wholeness, stability,
relationship, love, community.
How do I leverage my privilege?
It's we, the people who are watching me now,
the people who are intelligent,
the people who have the power.
We have the power to change it.
It's we, we are the leaders we've been waiting for.
We need to learn how to be able to be in groups
where we're not bouncing off each other's egos,
but being deeply committed to something
that we really care about.
I think the world is ready.
I'm totally in agreement with ex-President Richard Nixon,
the plaque he had on his wall,
"When you've got them by the cajones,
"their hearts and minds will follow."
(Regina laughing)
Well, terrorism has us by the cajones.
We cannot win a war against terrorism.
It won't happen outside of having complete martial law,
and a fascist police state at home.
We're marching toward that.
We are marching more and more rapidly,
like lemmings screaming and yelling, waving our flags.
We are creating terrorists at home.
Up until now, they've all been Middle-Eastern terrorists
who couldn't speak very good English,
and we still couldn't stop them.
But now, they're right here at home.
There are terrorist cells growing right here at home,
and it's not hard to destroy a free society.
Just like it's not hard to kill a healthy body.
Exactly, exactly.
I think, you know, what was it?
In the old story of Jack Benny used to tell,
where the crook steps out of the shadows
and puts a gun up against his head, and says,
"Okay, your money or your life."
Jack Benny says, "Can I have a moment to think about it?"
(both laughing)
Because of his stinginess.
Are we that stingy or can we realize
that this is a life or death struggle?
This is a life or death struggle,
and the struggle has to do with whether or not
we're going to see those people who are in prisons
as human beings that we can communicate with,
not animals that we should toughen and make even,
even more angry, and even more resentful
to go out and create the damage in the world.
Are we going to take a look across the aisle
and drop this Republican versus Democrat thing?
Are we going to say, what we have is so much greater
than what we share?
What we share is so much greater
than what we have as differences?
That our wholeness, that which brings us together,
is much more important and much stronger
than that which tends to separate us.
We have the ability to choose that.
We have the ability to see each other as human beings,
and to say, "There's room enough
"in this world for all of us."
We can live our lives differently.
We can make new choices.
We can take care of each other.
Until we begin to recognize that that's true.
The tools are here to do it,
and I think we have the gun to our head,
and I think that gradually people are going to hear me
and the many other people who are saying
exactly the same thing, and say, maybe he's right.
Maybe I should take a moment
and see how much denial I'm in, and come out of it.
Maybe the health of my children is dependent upon it.
Maybe my own life, and the lives of those that I care about
is immediately dependent upon it.
Maybe the health of the planet
is dependent upon my taking a look at things.
Maybe I have some responsibility in this whole thing.
The amazing thing is that when one wakes up to that,
it's a wonderful feeling, because we all feel helpless.
We all feel pounded by all these forces
that are too big for us.
Suddenly you realize, "Oh, wait a minute.
"We can do something," and we start telling people,
"Hey, you don't have to feel that way."
They go, "Really?"
You go, "Yeah."
They go, "Oh, tell me," and it feels really good
to share this with another person.
As you get more people who begin to recognize this,
and begin to work together, you get something
called team spirit.
In other words, there's a new whole,
a new entity defined, which is the team,
and it has a life of its own.
That life can nurture us.
What we didn't talk about is that
Emmett was the first to bring guided meditation
and self-healing to public via tapes and CDs.
His work on deep healing is available on his site,
which you can find by clicking on the link below.
If you're ready to ask the deep questions,
you can also find a link to the World Cafe.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.
(gentle instrumental music)